[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the IBM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: Imagine this.
[Amit Varma]: You are taking a leisurely walk in a quiet neighborhood of Ahmedabad, when suddenly you
[Amit Varma]: see a queue of people, a long queue that reveals its length as you walk alongside it, it snakes
[Amit Varma]: around the corner, goes to the end of the next road, turns left, then turns right, then
[Amit Varma]: left again, then up a flyover, down the flyover, around a Gol Chakkar, and finally it ends
[Amit Varma]: at a small photo studio.
[Amit Varma]: You go to the head of the queue and ask the first person in the line, hey what's going
[Amit Varma]: on here, why such a long queue?
[Amit Varma]: The gentleman looks at you and says, haven't you heard?
[Amit Varma]: This photo studio is offering free passport photographs to everyone, no strings attached.
[Amit Varma]: That is why we have all lined up.
[Amit Varma]: You scratch your chin, you think for a few moments, and then you say wait a minute, there
[Amit Varma]: must be some catch, this is weird, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
[Amit Varma]: Just then, a lady in the queue offers you a dhokla.
[Amit Varma]: You accept her dhokla gratefully, for you are hungry after this long walk.
[Amit Varma]: The dhokla tastes amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Is there really such a thing as a free lunch?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, I am your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode, I am not going to talk about a specific public policy from a wonks
[Amit Varma]: point of view.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, I am going to tell you a little story.
[Amit Varma]: A few days ago, I was in Delhi, staying over at my friend Mohit Satyanand's place.
[Amit Varma]: We were drinking tea and talking about this and that, when his office assistant came over
[Amit Varma]: and handed Mohit a thick bunch of papers.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit leafed through the papers and he sighed.
[Guest]: Then he said to me, this is all because of Rupal Bain.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit, welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit, so tell me, who is this Rupal Bain and what has she done?
[Guest]: Well, you know, you have to rewind to the 2005-2006 era, when there was this enormous
[Guest]: flurry of IPOs, initial public offerings, when shares get placed on the market.
[Guest]: And it seemed as though every IPO, when it actually came onto the market, offered a huge
[Guest]: premium between the price of the IPO and the launch price on the stock exchange.
[Guest]: So it seemed as though all you had to do was get hold of some shares in that allotment
[Guest]: and you made money.
[Guest]: Now, the catch obviously was that every IPO was oversubscribed, five times, ten times,
[Guest]: fifty times, hundred times.
[Guest]: So it's not as though you could get as much as you wanted at the time of the IPO.
[Guest]: Now, you know, the story you told about the snaking line, it reminds me of Soviet Russia.
[Guest]: And one of the things that was wrong with Soviet Russia was bad incentives.
[Guest]: And that's usually the story of every bad economy.
[Guest]: So now the government in its infinite wisdom said that people benefiting from IPOs should
[Guest]: not just be the rich people.
[Guest]: The small person, you know, that overriding concern for the small person.
[Guest]: Like me.
[Guest]: Yeah, like you.
[Guest]: Must be benefited as well.
[Guest]: And so for every IPO, they had a separate category for the small investor called the
[Guest]: retail investor.
[Guest]: And I think at that point in time, the retail investor was defined as somebody who put less
[Guest]: than one lakh application because the number of retail investors was always fairly small
[Guest]: in comparison to the people who had money and wanted to go into it.
[Guest]: So chances of getting allotment in the retail were much higher.
[Guest]: So what Rupal Ben Panchal did was that in the Yes Bank IPO, it was later detected that
[Guest]: she had fielded, I have the figure here somewhere, 6,515 applications under the retail segment.
[Guest]: And out of that, 6,221 had the same address, 402 to 403 Shashwat building opposite Gujarat
[Guest]: College Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, obviously this could only be done in collusion with a bank.
[Guest]: So bank was obviously involved.
[Guest]: The bank which opened the bank account, which allowed them to pay the money, which allowed
[Guest]: them to open a DMAT account.
[Guest]: But there was one issue, which is that the forms had to be complete and the forms required
[Guest]: a photograph, how do you produce 6,515 photographs, enter the free passport photograph?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me more about this.
[Guest]: Well, that's the answer.
[Guest]: So everyone who went in got that two free passport photographs, but Rupal Ben Panchal
[Guest]: and her husband and their cabal also kept copies of that photographs, put them on to
[Guest]: the application, had any kind of arbitrary signature, but at least, you know, this concept
[Guest]: we have of Khanapuri, means you tick the boxes, the bank had ticked all the boxes.
[Guest]: There was an address.
[Guest]: In those days, you didn't require PAN card for any application under 50,000 rupees.
[Guest]: So PAN card was not required, you had a photograph, you had an address, the bank manager ticked
[Guest]: all the boxes and you made this application.
[Guest]: So this is what they did and though it came to light in the Yes Bank application, in the
[Guest]: Yes Bank IPO case, as the investigation proceeded, they discovered that this cabal had applied
[Guest]: in 21 IPOs.
[Guest]: And in one of those IPOs, it's not clear whether, you know, there was a fixed number of operators,
[Guest]: but there were a lot of common elements.
[Guest]: In one particular application, there were 21,000 forms, which were filled up by this
[Guest]: ring.
[Amit Varma]: That is a lot of passport photographs.
[Guest]: That's a lot of passport photographs and hence you're probably right, that line really sneaked
[Guest]: through all around the path.
[Amit Varma]: So what happened as a consequence of her getting caught?
[Amit Varma]: Why does Rupal Ban bother you so much today?
[Guest]: She bothers me for two reasons.
[Guest]: She bothers me for two reasons because now what has happened is that as you started the
[Guest]: story is that compliance issues have gone up.
[Guest]: And this is a larger phenomenon that I face as a businessman and even as an honest tax
[Guest]: paying citizen, which is that compliance issues have gone up massively.
[Guest]: It takes me an enormous amount of time to comply with issues relating to know your customer,
[Guest]: with issues relating to filing my tax returns, my tax returns then have to get audited, etc.
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: The effort that goes into opening a new bank account, this impacts everybody, it's just
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: It's a huge opportunity cost and the amount of time that people spend doing this, it could
[Amit Varma]: be doing something else which is productive for the economy.
[Guest]: The other reason that it bothers me is that our economic history is littered with bad
[Guest]: incentives.
[Guest]: You take another area that I'm familiar with, which is the grain trade.
[Guest]: So you have a public distribution system.
[Guest]: What the public distribution system essentially does is to create differential pricing.
[Guest]: So you create one price for the supposedly poor person, another price for the supposedly
[Guest]: rich person.
[Guest]: So you have the BPL and you have the APL and then you have the market price and then more
[Guest]: recently another price was introduced, which was the Antyoday price, which is like, you
[Guest]: know, to end poverty and end hunger.
[Guest]: So I have four prices prevailing in the market.
[Guest]: You're creating an opportunity for arbitrage and systems will milk that arbitrage.
[Guest]: And what you do by creating these concessions, which is again coming from this great concern
[Guest]: with the underdog, what you do is actually you corrupt the entire system.
[Guest]: You create an entire class of people whose only contribution to the economy is to bridge
[Guest]: that arbitrage.
[Guest]: Now this we know, this is what efficient economies do.
[Guest]: But as a result, you have created corruption from top to bottom.
[Guest]: You've created FCI managers who send the trucks directly from FCI depots to grain traders.
[Guest]: You have created truck drivers who are part of this whole system.
[Guest]: You've created mill owners who function entirely on BDS stock.
[Guest]: You've created BDS shops, which have a wheat milling installation next door so they can
[Guest]: move.
[Guest]: You've created, you've perpetuated a corrupt way of looking at the world by creating all
[Guest]: these ridiculous incentives.
[Guest]: Every sector you look at, there is this desire to tinker with the economy for some holier-than-thou
[Guest]: motive.
[Guest]: But all you do is create incentives for short circuits for the Rupal Panchayats of the world.
[Guest]: So more than the compliance and the fact that I had to sign a few extra forms, what bothers
[Guest]: me is that we don't seem to learn.
[Guest]: We don't seem to learn that when you create an opportunity for arbitrage, that opportunity
[Guest]: is going to get milked and you're going to create more and more corrupt people.
[Amit Varma]: And also when you create incentives for dishonesty, that eventually percolates down to the culture.
[Guest]: That's what I'm talking about.
[Guest]: That's what really bothers me, that we have a culture of corruption and that culture of
[Guest]: corruption is not because we are inherently corrupt people or there's something wrong
[Guest]: with the Hindu gene.
[Guest]: It's because for 70 years, you have always tried to set prices and set artificial prices.
[Guest]: Don't allow flexibility into the system, create two categories of economic players or three
[Amit Varma]: or four or five, you're going to end up with this.
[Amit Varma]: So finally, if you had the story of Rupal Ban in a fourth standard textbook and fourth
[Amit Varma]: standard kids always want a moral at the end of the story, what's the moral of the story?
[Guest]: The moral of the story should be eye pencil, which is that goods get created when and they
[Guest]: get created efficiently and they get created with uniform and very elastic prices when
[Amit Varma]: you allow economic actors to play.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit, thank you so much for being on the show.
[Unknown]: My pleasure.
[Unknown]: Next week on The Seen and the Unseen, Amit Varma will be talking to Pranay Kodasane about
[Unknown]: the surgical strikes conducted by the government last year in September.
[Unknown]: For more, go to seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and the Unseen, check out another show by IVM Podcasts,
[Amit Varma]: Symbolified, which is hosted by my good friends Naren, Chuck and Srikith.
[Unknown]: You can download it at Audioboom or iTunes.